fix(rdb): pgaudit (#2888)
scaleway/docs-content: managed-databases/postgresql-and-mysql/api-cli/pg-audit.mdx

---
meta:
 title: Setting up and using the pgaudit extension
 description: This page explains how to set up and use the pgaudit extension.
content:
 h1: Setting up and using the pgaudit extension
 paragraph: This page explains how to set up and use the pgaudit extension.
tags: managed-database postgresql pgaudit pg-extensions
dates:
 validation: 2024-03-05
 posted: 2024-03-05
categories:
 - managed-databases
 - postgresql-and-mysql
---

The `pgaudit` extension is available with Scaleway Managed Databases for PostgresSQL. The extension is a powerful monitoring and logging tool that allows you to keep track of the actions happening in your databases, and record them.

`pgaudit` allows you to log different statements executed in your Database Instance, or specific databases. You can keep track of who accessed your databases, what actions were performed, and when, under a [structured format](https://github.com/pgaudit/pgaudit/blob/master/README.md#format).

You can configure the extension to log only what is relevant to your audits.

> ## Requirements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Macro id="requirements" />

```

> - Be the [Owner](/identity-and-access-management/iam/concepts/#owner) of the Organization in which the actions will be performed, or an IAM user with the [necessary permissions](/identity-and-access-management/iam/concepts/#permission)

Reviewer: - A Scaleway account logged into the [console](https://console.scaleway.com)

> - Be the [Owner](/identity-and-access-management/iam/concepts/#owner) of the Organization in which the actions will be performed, or an IAM user with the [necessary permissions](/identity-and-access-management/iam/concepts/#permission)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A Scaleway account logged into the [console](https://console.scaleway.com)
```

> - A Scaleway account logged into the [console](https://console.scaleway.com)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Owner](/identity-and-access-management/iam/concepts/#owner) status or [IAM permissions](/identity-and-access-management/iam/concepts/#permission) allowing you to perform actions in the intended Organization
```

| `FUNCTION`   | Logs function calls and `DO` blocks. |
| `ROLE`       | Logs statements related to roles and privileges, such as `GRANT`, `REVOKE`, `CREATE`, `ALTER`, and `DROP` `ROLE`.        |
| `DDL`        | Covers all Data Definition Language (DDL) statements not included in the ROLE class. |
| `MISC`       | Logs miscellaneous commands like `DISCARD`, `FETCH`, `CHECKPOINT`, `VACUUM`, `SET`.   |
| `MISC_SET`   | Logs miscellaneous `SET` commands. |
| `ALL`        | Includes all of the above classes for comprehensive logging. |

<Tabs id="pgauditlog">

 <TabsTab label="For a Database Instance">

   1. Go to the **Advanced settings** of your Database Instance in the Scaleway console.
   4. Click <Icon name="edit" />.
   5. Click **+ Add parameters**.
   6. Select `pgaudit.log` in the drop-down.
   7. Enter one or more of the statement class values listed above.
     <Message type="note">
       The values must be written in uppercase. If entering more than one class, separate them with a comma and no spaces. For example: `READ,WRITE`.
     </Message>
   8. Click <Icon name="validate" /> to validate.
     <Message type="note">

>        The configuration takes a few seconds to be applied. During this time the Database Instance connection remains uninterrupted. However, you must wait the few seconds if you want to edit your advanced settings again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       The configuration takes a few seconds to be applied. During this time the Database Instance connection remains uninterrupted. However, you must wait a few seconds if you want to edit your advanced settings again.
```

     </Message>
   You can edit the `pgaudit.log` values in the advanced settings anytime.
 </TabsTab>

 <TabsTab label="For a specific database">

   1. [Connect to your database](/managed-databases/postgresql-and-mysql/how-to/connect-database-instance/) as an admin user.
   2. Run the following command to set `pgaudit.log` for the database. Replace `<database>` with the name of your database, and ´<class>` with one or more of the statement class values listed above.
     ```
     database=> ALTER DATABASE <database> SET pgaudit.log = '<class>'
     ```

>      If the operation is successful no output is returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     If the operation is successful, no output is returned.
```

Currently, only the `SELECT`, `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and `DELETE` permissions are supported.

  <Message type="note">
    There is no default principal role. You must create a new role, or specify an existing one as the principal audit.
  </Message>

To set up and grant permissions to the principal audit role follow these instructions:

1. [Connect to your database](/managed-databases/postgresql-and-mysql/how-to/connect-database-instance/) as an admin user.
2. Run the following command to create a new user. If no output is returned, the operation was successful.
    <Message type="note">
      If you want to specify an existing role as the principal audit, you can skip this step.
    </Message>

    ```
    CREATE ROLE auditor;
    ```
    You can replace `auditor` with your name of choice.

    <Message type="tip">
      Run `\du` to see a list of your database roles and check that the new role was created.
    </Message>
3. Set the role you created as `pgaudit.role`
    ```
    SET pgaudit.role = 'auditore';
    ```
    <Message type="note">

>       Alternatively you can follow these steps to confiure `pgaudit.role` from the Scaleway console:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Alternatively, you can follow these steps to configure `pgaudit.role` from the Scaleway console:
```

      1. Go to the **Advanced settings** of your Database Instance in the Scaleway console.
      2. Click <Icon name="edit" />.
      3. Click **+ Add parameters**.
      4. Select `pgaudit.role` in the drop-down and type the name of the role you created to be the principal.
      5. Click <Icon name="validate" /> to validate.
          <Message type="note">

>             The configuration takes a few seconds to be applied. During this time the Database Instance connection remains uninterrupted. However, you must wait the few seconds if you want to edit your advanced settings again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            The configuration takes a few seconds to be applied. During this time the Database Instance connection remains uninterrupted. However, you must wait a few seconds if you want to edit your advanced settings again.
```

          </Message>
    </Message>
    You can edit the `pgaudit.role` values in the advanced settings anytime.
4. Run the following command in your Database Instance to grant the principal audit role permissions:
    ```
    GRANT PERMISSION1, PERMISSION2
      on <object>
      to <principal-role>;
    ```
    Replace `<PERMISSION1>` AND `<PERMISSION2>` with one or more of the supported permissions, `<object>` with the name of the data object you want to audit, and `auditor` with the `<principal-role>` with the name of the principal role.

> If the operation was successful you see `GRANT` as an output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the operation was successful, you see `GRANT` as an output.
```

## Accessing and handling logs

Your logs are accessible via the Scaleway Observability dashboard, [Cockpit]().

You can set up

Object renames are logged under the name they were renamed to. (https://github.com/pgaudit/pgaudit/blob/master/README.md#caveats)

### Optimizing disk usage

> - Audit logs are flushed and consume disk space. The [log ingestion rate](https://www.scaleway.com/en/docs/observability/cockpit/reference-content/cockpit-limitations/#limits-for-loki) is **4MB per second**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Audit logs are flushed and consume disk space. The [log ingestion rate](https://www.scaleway.com/en/docs/observability/cockpit/reference-content/cockpit-limitations/#limits-for-loki) is **4 MB per second**.
```

### Technical Information
  - All management actions performed via API or the console, such as database creations and deletions, are logged, no matter the configuration. However, the associated read statements are not logged. For example, select statements used to check that actions have been correctly executed are not logged.

  - When objects are renamed, they will start to be logged under their new name. For more information, refer to the [official pgaudit repository on Github](https://github.com/pgaudit/pgaudit/blob/master/README.md#caveats)

  - Audit logs are displayed in a specific format that you can also find referenced in the [official pgaudit repository on Github](https://github.com/pgaudit/pgaudit/blob/master/README.md#format)

### Optimizing disk usage

- Audit logs are flushed and consume disk space. The [log ingestion rate](https://www.scaleway.com/en/docs/observability/cockpit/reference-content/cockpit-limitations/#limits-for-loki) is **4 MB per second**.

  To avoid log generation from exceeding ingestion, and the subsequent uncontrolled growth of disk usage, make sure you closely monitor the disk usage of the Database Instance.

  <Message type="important">

>     If the disk space becomes full, some audit logs may be lost.

Author: ```suggestion
    If the disk space becomes full, some audit logs may be lost, and the database can become unavailable. 
```

---
meta:
 title: Setting up and using the pgaudit extension
 description: This page explains how to set up and use the pgaudit extension.
content:
 h1: Setting up and using the pgaudit extension
 paragraph: This page explains how to set up and use the pgaudit extension.
tags: managed-database postgresql pgaudit pg-extensions
dates:
 validation: 2024-03-05
 posted: 2024-03-05
categories:
 - managed-databases
 - postgresql-and-mysql
---

> The `pgaudit` extension is available with Scaleway Managed Databases for PostgresSQL. The extension is a powerful monitoring and logging tool that allows you to keep track of the actions happening in your databases, and record them.

Author: ```suggestion
The `pgaudit` extension is available with Scaleway Managed Databases for PostgreSQL. The extension is a powerful monitoring and logging tool that allows you to keep track of the actions happening in your databases, and record them.
```

You can configure the extension to log only what is relevant to your audits.

<Macro id="requirements" />

- A Scaleway account logged into the [console](https://console.scaleway.com)
- [Owner](/identity-and-access-management/iam/concepts/#owner) status or [IAM permissions](/identity-and-access-management/iam/concepts/#permission) allowing you to perform actions in the intended Organization
- A [Database Instance](/managed-databases/postgresql-and-mysql/how-to/create-a-database) running a PostgreSQL engine

## Enabling and installing pgaudit

1. Click **PostgreSQL and MySQL** under **Managed Databases** on the side menu of the Scaleway console. A list of your Database Instances displays.
2. Click the Database Instance name or <Icon name="more" /> > **More info** to access the Instance information page.
3. Click the **Advanced settings** tab.
4. Click <Icon name="edit" />.
5. Click **+ Add parameters**.

> 6. Select `rdb.enable_pgaudit` in the drop-down and click the toggle to set it to `on`.

Reviewer 2: (I can't see the console for this option)

7. Click <Icon name="validate" /> to validate. Your Database Instance restarts.

   <Message type="important">

>      Restarting can take up to a few dozen seconds depending on the size of your Database Instance.

Reviewer 2: maybe something generic than "few dozen"

Author: cc @scw-wtimmermans what do you think?

Author: I prefer to be specific, personally

Author: ```suggestion
     Restarting can take several seconds depending on the size of your Database Instance.
```

what about this?

To use each one, you must configure the `pgaudit.log` and `pgaudit.role` settings, respectively.

Both settings can be set up at the Database Instance level, meaning that a global configuration can be applied to all databases within the Instance. You can configure them in the [advanced settings](/managed-databases/postgresql-and-mysql/concepts/#advanced-settings) of your Database Instance. You can use both settings concurrently.

`pgaudit.log` can also be configured for specific databases within your Instance.

### Setting up pgaudit.log

The `pgaudit.log` setting determines which classes of statements will be recorded through session audit logging.

The possible values include:

| Class        | Action         |
| ------------ | ------------------- |
| `READ`       | Logs `SELECT` and `COPY` commands when the source is a relation or a query. |
| `WRITE`      | Logs `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, `DELETE`, `TRUNCATE`, and `COPY` commands when the destination is a relation. |
| `FUNCTION`   | Logs function calls and `DO` blocks. |
| `ROLE`       | Logs statements related to roles and privileges, such as `GRANT`, `REVOKE`, `CREATE`, `ALTER`, and `DROP` `ROLE`.        |

> | `DDL`        | Covers all Data Definition Language (DDL) statements not included in the ROLE class. |

Author: ```suggestion
| `DDL`        | Covers all Data Definition Language (DDL) statements not included in the `ROLE` class. |
```

| `MISC`       | Logs miscellaneous commands like `DISCARD`, `FETCH`, `CHECKPOINT`, `VACUUM`, `SET`.   |
| `MISC_SET`   | Logs miscellaneous `SET` commands. |
| `ALL`        | Includes all of the above classes for comprehensive logging. |

<Tabs id="pgauditlog">

 <TabsTab label="For a Database Instance">

   1. Go to the **Advanced settings** of your Database Instance in the Scaleway console.
   2. Click <Icon name="edit" />.
   3. Click **+ Add parameters**.
   4. Select `pgaudit.log` in the drop-down.
   5. Enter one or more of the statement class values listed above.
      <Message type="note">
        The values must be written in uppercase. If entering more than one class, separate them with a comma and no spaces. For example: `READ,WRITE`.
      </Message>
   6. Click <Icon name="validate" /> to validate.
      <Message type="note">

>         The configuration takes a few seconds to be applied. During this time the Database Instance connection remains uninterrupted. However, you must wait the few seconds if you want to edit your advanced settings again.

Reviewer 2: "wait the few seconds" seems a bit off, maybe

```suggestion
        The configuration takes a few seconds to be applied. During this time the Database Instance connection remains uninterrupted. However, you must wait until the new configuration is applied to edit your advanced settings again.
```

      </Message>
   You can edit the `pgaudit.log` values in the advanced settings anytime.
 </TabsTab>

 <TabsTab label="For a specific database">

   1. [Connect to your database](/managed-databases/postgresql-and-mysql/how-to/connect-database-instance/) as an admin user.

>    2. Run the following command to set `pgaudit.log` for the database. Replace `<database>` with the name of your database, and `<class>` with one or more of the statement class values listed above.

Author: oops forgot
```suggestion
   2. Run the following command to set `pgaudit.log` for the database. Replace `<database>` with the name of your database, and `<class>` with one or more of the statement class values listed above. When listing more than one class, separate them with a comma and no spaces. For example: `WRITE,FUNCTION`.
```

      database=> ALTER DATABASE <database> SET pgaudit.log = '<class>'
      ```
      If the operation is successful no output is returned.

   3. Reset the connection to your database to apply the configuration:
      ```
      database=> \q

      $ psql -h <ip-address> -p <port> -d <database-name> -U <username>
      ```
      <Message type="tip">
        Run `\drds` to see a list of your settings. You should get an output like the following:
        ```
                                        List of settings
          Role | Database |                   Settings
          ------+----------+----------------------------------------------
                | postgres | pgaudit.log=WRITE,FUNCTION,ROLE,DDL,MISC_SET
        ```
      </Message>

 </TabsTab>

</Tabs>

### Setting up pgaudit.role

Object audit logging is configured through the roles system. The `pgaudit.role` setting allows you to specify a principal audit role (also known as "master role").

Various audit roles can be established, delegating responsibility for distinct aspects of audit logging to different groups. These roles must subsequently be assigned to the principal audit role to facilitate audit logging.

> The primary function of the principal audit role is to oversee and manage the auditing process. The auditing process is generally handled by an independent individual or company, which will use the audit logs to perform their audit.

Reviewer 3: to oversee and manage the audit logging process*

> The primary function of the principal audit role is to oversee and manage the auditing process. The auditing process is generally handled by an independent individual or company, which will use the audit logs to perform their audit.

Author: ```suggestion
The primary function of the principal audit role is to oversee and manage the audit logging process. The auditing process is generally handled by an independent individual or company, which will use the audit logs to perform their audit.
```

  <Message type="note">
    There is no default principal role. You must create a new role, or specify an existing one as the principal audit.
  </Message>

  <Message type="tip">
    When specifying principal role for object audit logging, we recommend first revoking all its privileges, and then granting specific audit permissions, to improve auditing.
  </Message>

To set up and grant permissions to the principal audit role follow these instructions:

1. [Connect to your database](/managed-databases/postgresql-and-mysql/how-to/connect-database-instance/) as an admin user.
2. Run the following command to create a new user. If no output is returned, the operation was successful.
    <Message type="note">
      If you want to specify an existing role as the principal audit, you can skip this step.
    </Message>

    ```
    CREATE ROLE auditor;
    ```
    You can replace `auditor` with your name of choice.

    <Message type="tip">
      Run `\du` to see a list of your database roles and check that the new role was created.
    </Message>
3. Set the role you created as `pgaudit.role`
    ```

>     SET pgaudit.role = 'auditore';

Reviewer 3: auditor*

Author: ```suggestion
    SET pgaudit.role = 'auditor';
```

    ```
    <Message type="note">
      Alternatively, you can follow these steps to configure `pgaudit.role` from the Scaleway console:

      1. Go to the **Advanced settings** of your Database Instance in the Scaleway console.
      2. Click <Icon name="edit" />.
      3. Click **+ Add parameters**.

>       4. Select `pgaudit.role` in the drop-down and type the name of the role you created to be the principal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      4. Select `pgaudit.role` in the drop-down and enter the name of the role you created to be the principal.
```

Reviewer 2: for consistency

      5. Click <Icon name="validate" /> to validate.
        <Message type="note">

>           The configuration takes a few seconds to be applied. During this time the Database Instance connection remains uninterrupted. However, you must wait the few seconds if you want to edit your advanced settings again.

Author: ```suggestion
The configuration takes a few seconds to be applied. During this time the Database Instance connection remains uninterrupted. However, you must wait until the new configuration is applied to edit your advanced settings again.
```

### Session audit logging for only DML statements
To set up session audit logging only of Data Manipulation Language (DML) statements for all databases and roles, set `pgaudit.log` to `WRITE` in the advanced settings tab of your Database Instance dashboard in the Scaleway console.

### Session audit logging for ALL statements in a specific database

To set up session audit logging of all statements in only one database, you must:

1. Set `pgaudit.log` to `NONE` in the advanced settings tab of your Database Instance dashboard in the Scaleway console, and
2. [Connect to your database](/managed-databases/postgresql-and-mysql/how-to/connect-database-instance/) as an admin user and run the following command:
    ```
    ALTER DATABASE mydb SET pgaudit.log = 'all';
    ```
    Replace `mydb` with the name of your database.

### Session audit logging and object audit logging

To set up:
  - session audit logging of all statements except `READ` and `WRITE` for all databases and roles, and
  - object audit logging of `SELECT`, `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and `DELETE` statements only on a specific table in a database.

> 1. Set `pgaudit.log` to `FUNCTION,ROLE,DDL,MISC,MISC_SET` and the `pgaudit.role` as `auditor` in the advanced settings tab of your Database Instance dashboard in the Scaleway console. You can replace `auditor` with the name of your principal audit role.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Set `pgaudit.log` to `FUNCTION,ROLE,DDL,MISC,MISC_SET`, and the `pgaudit.role` as `auditor` in the advanced settings tab of your Database Instance dashboard in the Scaleway console. You can replace `auditor` with the name of your principal audit role.
```

    <Message type="note">
      There is no default principal role. You must [create a new role, or specify an existing one](#setting-up-pgaudit.role) as the principal audit.
    </Message>

2. [Connect to your database](/managed-databases/postgresql-and-mysql/how-to/connect-database-instance/) as an admin user and run the following command:
    ```
    GRANT SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE
      on mydb.mytable
      to auditor;
    ```
    Replace `mydb` with the name of your database and `mytable` with the name of the table.

> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

- A [Database Instance](/managed-databases/postgresql-and-mysql/how-to/create-a-database) running a PostgreSQL engine

## Enabling and installing pgaudit

1. Click **PostgreSQL and MySQL** under **Managed Databases** on the side menu of the Scaleway console. A list of your Database Instances displays.
2. Click the Database Instance name or <Icon name="more" /> > **More info** to access the Instance information page.
3. Click the **Advanced settings** tab.
4. Click <Icon name="edit" />.
5. Click **+ Add parameters**.
6. Select `rdb.enable_pgaudit` in the drop-down and click the toggle to set it to `on`.
7. Click <Icon name="validate" /> to validate. Your Database Instance restarts.

   <Message type="important">
     Restarting can take up to a few dozen seconds depending on the size of your Database Instance.
   </Message>
8. [Connect to your Database Instance](/managed-databases/postgresql-and-mysql/how-to/connect-database-instance/).
9. Run the following command to install the `pgaudit` extension.
   ```
   CREATE EXTENSION pgaudit
   ```

   If the operation is successful, no output is returned.

## Configuring pgaudit

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

`pgaudit` provides two different types of logging:
   - **Session audit logging** - logs the operations, such as queries and updates, executed by a user during a session within a database or the entire Database Instance
   - **Object audit logging** - logs actions that involve specific data objects, like tables or files.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

To use each one, you must configure the `pgaudit.log` and `pgaudit.role` settings, respectively.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

Both settings can be set up at the Database Instance level, meaning that a global configuration can be applied to all databases within the Instance. You can configure them in the [advanced settings](/managed-databases/postgresql-and-mysql/concepts/#advanced-settings) of your Database Instance. You can use both settings concurrently.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

`pgaudit.log` can also be configured for specific databases within your Instance.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

Is there are specific reason why you used two line breaks every time?
